README.md, before:

<!-- [![Cite with Zenodo](http://img.shields.io/badge/DOI-10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX-1073c8?labelColor=000000)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX)-->
[![Nextflow](https://img.shields.io/badge/nextflow%20DSL2-%E2%89%A522.10.1-23aa62.svg)](https://www.nextflow.io/)
[![run with conda](http://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-conda-3EB049?labelColor=000000&logo=anaconda)](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)
[![run with docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-docker-0db7ed?labelColor=000000&logo=docker)](https://www.docker.com/)
[![run with singularity](https://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-singularity-1d355c.svg?labelColor=000000)](https://sylabs.io/docs/)
[![Launch on Nextflow Tower](https://img.shields.io/badge/Launch%20%F0%9F%9A%80-Nextflow%20Tower-%234256e7)](https://tower.nf/launch?pipeline=https://github.com/cio-abcd/variantinterpretation)

## Introduction

<!-- TODO nf-core: Write a 1-2 sentence summary of what data the pipeline is for and what it does -->

**cio-abcd/variantinterpretation** is a bioinformatics best-practice analysis pipeline for adding biological and clinical knowledge to genomic variants.

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io), a workflow tool to run tasks across multiple compute infrastructures in a very portable manner. It uses Docker/Singularity containers making installation trivial and results highly reproducible. The [Nextflow DSL2](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/dsl2.html) implementation of this pipeline uses one container per process which makes it much easier to maintain and update software dependencies. Where possible, these processes have been submitted to and installed from [nf-core/modules](https://github.com/nf-core/modules) in order to make them available to all nf-core pipelines, and to everyone within the Nextflow community!

<!-- TODO nf-core: Add full-sized test dataset and amend the paragraph below if applicable -->

<!-- On release, automated continuous integration tests run the pipeline on a full-sized dataset on the AWS cloud infrastructure. This ensures that the pipeline runs on AWS, has sensible resource allocation defaults set to run on real-world datasets, and permits the persistent storage of results to benchmark between pipeline releases and other analysis sources.-->

## Pipeline summary

<!-- TODO nf-core: Fill in short bullet-pointed list of the default steps in the pipeline -->

1. Read QC ([`FastQC`](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/))
2. Present QC for raw reads ([`MultiQC`](http://multiqc.info/))

## Quick Start

1. Install [`Nextflow`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/getstarted.html#installation) (`>=22.10.1`)

2. Install any of [`Docker`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/installation/), [`Singularity`](https://www.sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/) (you can follow [this tutorial](https://singularity-tutorial.github.io/01-installation/)), [`Podman`](https://podman.io/), [`Shifter`](https://nersc.gitlab.io/development/shifter/how-to-use/) or [`Charliecloud`](https://hpc.github.io/charliecloud/) for full pipeline reproducibility _(you can use [`Conda`](https://conda.io/miniconda.html) both to install Nextflow itself and also to manage software within pipelines. Please only use it within pipelines as a last resort; see [docs](https://nf-co.re/usage/configuration#basic-configuration-profiles))_.

3. Download the pipeline and test it on a minimal dataset with a single command:

   ```bash
   nextflow run cio-abcd/variantinterpretation -profile test,YOURPROFILE --outdir <OUTDIR>
   ```

   Note that some form of configuration will be needed so that Nextflow knows how to fetch the required software. This is usually done in the form of a config profile (`YOURPROFILE` in the example command above). You can chain multiple config profiles in a comma-separated string.

   > - The pipeline comes with config profiles called `docker`, `singularity`, `podman`, `shifter`, `charliecloud` and `conda` which instruct the pipeline to use the named tool for software management. For example, `-profile test,docker`.
   > - Please check [nf-core/configs](https://github.com/nf-core/configs#documentation) to see if a custom config file to run nf-core pipelines already exists for your Institute. If so, you can simply use `-profile <institute>` in your command. This will enable either `docker` or `singularity` and set the appropriate execution settings for your local compute environment.
   > - If you are using `singularity`, please use the [`nf-core download`](https://nf-co.re/tools/#downloading-pipelines-for-offline-use) command to download images first, before running the pipeline. Setting the [`NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR` or `singularity.cacheDir`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/singularity.html?#singularity-docker-hub) Nextflow options enables you to store and re-use the images from a central location for future pipeline runs.
   > - If you are using `conda`, it is highly recommended to use the [`NXF_CONDA_CACHEDIR` or `conda.cacheDir`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/conda.html) settings to store the environments in a central location for future pipeline runs.

<!-- 4. Start running your own analysis! -->

   <!-- TODO nf-core: Update the example "typical command" below used to run the pipeline -->
<!--
   ```bash
   nextflow run cio-abcd/variantinterpretation --input samplesheet.csv --outdir <OUTDIR> --genome GRCh37 -profile <docker/singularity/podman/shifter/charliecloud/conda/institute>
   ```
-->
## Contributions and Support

This Pipeline development repository is a collaborative effort of the Center for Integrated Oncology of the Universities of Aachen, Bonn, Cologne and Düsseldorf to standardize and optimize data analysis in a clinical context.
TODO: Add Information on CIO and ZPM.
If you would like to contribute to this pipeline, please see the [contributing guidelines](.github/CONTRIBUTING.md).

**Contributing authors**

- RWTH University Hospital (UKA): Lancelot Seillier
- University Hospital Bonn (UKB): Patrick Basitta, Florian Hölscher
- University Hospital Düsseldorf (UKD): Kai Horny

## Citations

<!-- TODO nf-core: Add citation for pipeline after first release. Uncomment lines below and update Zenodo doi and badge at the top of this file. -->
<!-- If you use  cio-abcd/variantinterpretation for your analysis, please cite it using the following doi: [10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXX](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXX) -->

<!-- TODO nf-core: Add bibliography of tools and data used in your pipeline -->

An extensive list of references for the tools used by the pipeline can be found in the [`CITATIONS.md`](CITATIONS.md) file.

This pipeline uses code and infrastructure developed and maintained by the [nf-core](https://nf-co.re) community, reused here under the [MIT license](https://github.com/nf-core/tools/blob/master/LICENSE).

> **The nf-core framework for community-curated bioinformatics pipelines.**
>
> Philip Ewels, Alexander Peltzer, Sven Fillinger, Harshil Patel, Johannes Alneberg, Andreas Wilm, Maxime Ulysse Garcia, Paolo Di Tommaso & Sven Nahnsen.
>
> _Nat Biotechnol._ 2020 Feb 13. doi: [10.1038/s41587-020-0439-x](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0439-x).

Commit message:

Updated documentation for VCF input, added VEP module and removed FASTQC module.

README.md, after:

<!-- [![Cite with Zenodo](http://img.shields.io/badge/DOI-10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX-1073c8?labelColor=000000)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX)-->
[![Nextflow](https://img.shields.io/badge/nextflow%20DSL2-%E2%89%A522.10.1-23aa62.svg)](https://www.nextflow.io/)
[![run with conda](http://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-conda-3EB049?labelColor=000000&logo=anaconda)](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)
[![run with docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-docker-0db7ed?labelColor=000000&logo=docker)](https://www.docker.com/)
[![run with singularity](https://img.shields.io/badge/run%20with-singularity-1d355c.svg?labelColor=000000)](https://sylabs.io/docs/)
[![Launch on Nextflow Tower](https://img.shields.io/badge/Launch%20%F0%9F%9A%80-Nextflow%20Tower-%234256e7)](https://tower.nf/launch?pipeline=https://github.com/cio-abcd/variantinterpretation)

## Introduction

The pipeline takes as input SNVs and short InDels in VCF file format and annotates them using Ensembl variant effect predictor (VEP). Several parameters in VEP annotation can be configured through this workflow. 

**cio-abcd/variantinterpretation** is a bioinformatics best-practice analysis pipeline for adding biological and clinical knowledge to genomic variants.

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io), a workflow tool to run tasks across multiple compute infrastructures in a very portable manner. It uses Docker/Singularity containers making installation trivial and results highly reproducible. The [Nextflow DSL2](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/dsl2.html) implementation of this pipeline uses one container per process which makes it much easier to maintain and update software dependencies. Where possible, these processes have been submitted to and installed from [nf-core/modules](https://github.com/nf-core/modules) in order to make them available to all nf-core pipelines, and to everyone within the Nextflow community!

<!-- TODO nf-core: Add full-sized test dataset and amend the paragraph below if applicable -->

<!-- On release, automated continuous integration tests run the pipeline on a full-sized dataset on the AWS cloud infrastructure. This ensures that the pipeline runs on AWS, has sensible resource allocation defaults set to run on real-world datasets, and permits the persistent storage of results to benchmark between pipeline releases and other analysis sources.-->

## Pipeline summary

<!-- TODO nf-core: Fill in short bullet-pointed list of the default steps in the pipeline -->

1. Run Samplesheet check with modified [nf-core script](bin/check_samplesheet.py)
2. Annotation using [Ensembl variant effect predictor (VEP)](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/index.html)
3. Run MultiQC ([`MultiQC`](http://multiqc.info/))

## Quick Start

1. Install [`Nextflow`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/getstarted.html#installation) (`>=22.10.1`)

2. Install any of [`Docker`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/installation/), [`Singularity`](https://www.sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/) (you can follow [this tutorial](https://singularity-tutorial.github.io/01-installation/)), [`Podman`](https://podman.io/), [`Shifter`](https://nersc.gitlab.io/development/shifter/how-to-use/) or [`Charliecloud`](https://hpc.github.io/charliecloud/) for full pipeline reproducibility _(you can use [`Conda`](https://conda.io/miniconda.html) both to install Nextflow itself and also to manage software within pipelines. Please only use it within pipelines as a last resort; see [docs](https://nf-co.re/usage/configuration#basic-configuration-profiles))_.

3. Download the pipeline and test it on a minimal dataset with a single command:

   ```bash
   nextflow run cio-abcd/variantinterpretation -profile test,YOURPROFILE --outdir <OUTDIR>
   ```

   Note that some form of configuration will be needed so that Nextflow knows how to fetch the required software. This is usually done in the form of a config profile (`YOURPROFILE` in the example command above). You can chain multiple config profiles in a comma-separated string.

   > - The pipeline comes with config profiles called `docker`, `singularity`, `podman`, `shifter`, `charliecloud` and `conda` which instruct the pipeline to use the named tool for software management. For example, `-profile test,docker`.
   > - Please check [nf-core/configs](https://github.com/nf-core/configs#documentation) to see if a custom config file to run nf-core pipelines already exists for your Institute. If so, you can simply use `-profile <institute>` in your command. This will enable either `docker` or `singularity` and set the appropriate execution settings for your local compute environment.
   > - If you are using `singularity`, please use the [`nf-core download`](https://nf-co.re/tools/#downloading-pipelines-for-offline-use) command to download images first, before running the pipeline. Setting the [`NXF_SINGULARITY_CACHEDIR` or `singularity.cacheDir`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/singularity.html?#singularity-docker-hub) Nextflow options enables you to store and re-use the images from a central location for future pipeline runs.
   > - If you are using `conda`, it is highly recommended to use the [`NXF_CONDA_CACHEDIR` or `conda.cacheDir`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/conda.html) settings to store the environments in a central location for future pipeline runs.

4. Start running your own analysis!

Specify parameters best using `nf-core launch` and add to run command.

   ```bash
   nextflow run cio-abcd/variantinterpretation -params-file nf-params.json -profile <docker/singularity/podman/shifter/charliecloud/conda/institute>
   ```

## Contributions and Support

This Pipeline development repository is a collaborative effort of the Center for Integrated Oncology of the Universities of Aachen, Bonn, Cologne and Düsseldorf to standardize and optimize data analysis in a clinical context.
TODO: Add Information on CIO and ZPM.
If you would like to contribute to this pipeline, please see the [contributing guidelines](.github/CONTRIBUTING.md).

**Contributing authors**

- RWTH University Hospital (UKA): Lancelot Seillier
- University Hospital Bonn (UKB): Patrick Basitta, Florian Hölscher
- University Hospital Düsseldorf (UKD): Kai Horny

## Citations

<!-- TODO nf-core: Add citation for pipeline after first release. Uncomment lines below and update Zenodo doi and badge at the top of this file. -->
<!-- If you use  cio-abcd/variantinterpretation for your analysis, please cite it using the following doi: [10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXX](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXX) -->

<!-- TODO nf-core: Add bibliography of tools and data used in your pipeline -->

An extensive list of references for the tools used by the pipeline can be found in the [`CITATIONS.md`](CITATIONS.md) file.

This pipeline uses code and infrastructure developed and maintained by the [nf-core](https://nf-co.re) community, reused here under the [MIT license](https://github.com/nf-core/tools/blob/master/LICENSE).

> **The nf-core framework for community-curated bioinformatics pipelines.**
>
> Philip Ewels, Alexander Peltzer, Sven Fillinger, Harshil Patel, Johannes Alneberg, Andreas Wilm, Maxime Ulysse Garcia, Paolo Di Tommaso & Sven Nahnsen.
>
> _Nat Biotechnol._ 2020 Feb 13. doi: [10.1038/s41587-020-0439-x](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0439-x).
