docs/output.md, before:

# cio-abcd/variantinterpretation: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline. Most of the plots are taken from the MultiQC report, which summarises results at the end of the pipeline.

The directories listed below will be created in the results directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

<!-- TODO nf-core: Write this documentation describing your workflow's output -->

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [ensemblvep](#ensemblvep) - Annotated VCF file and summary.
- [MultiQC](#multiqc) - Aggregate report describing results and QC from the whole pipeline
- [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution

### Ensembl VEP

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `ensemblvep/`
  - `*.summary.html`: Summary VEP report.
  - `*.vcf.gz`: Gzipped VCF file containing the input variants annotated with VEP. The CSQ string gives information about added columns by VEP.
  </details>

[VEP](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/index.html) annotated variants based on provided public databases. It provides biological information as protein consequence and effect prediction as well as co-located variants from existing databases giving information, e.g., about population allele frequencies. For full overview, see the [VEP annotation sources](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/script/vep_cache.html) and [VEP command flags](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/script/vep_options.html).

### MultiQC

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `multiqc/`
  - `multiqc_report.html`: a standalone HTML file that can be viewed in your web browser.
  - `multiqc_data/`: directory containing parsed statistics from the different tools used in the pipeline.
  - `multiqc_plots/`: directory containing static images from the report in various formats.

</details>

[MultiQC](http://multiqc.info) is a visualization tool that generates a single HTML report summarising all samples in your project. Most of the pipeline QC results are visualised in the report and further statistics are available in the report data directory.

Results generated by MultiQC collate pipeline QC from supported tools e.g. FastQC. The pipeline has special steps which also allow the software versions to be reported in the MultiQC output for future traceability. For more information about how to use MultiQC reports, see <http://multiqc.info>.

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reports generated by the pipeline: `pipeline_report.html`, `pipeline_report.txt` and `software_versions.yml`. The `pipeline_report*` files will only be present if the `--email` / `--email_on_fail` parameter's are used when running the pipeline.
  - Reformatted samplesheet files used as input to the pipeline: `samplesheet.valid.csv`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.

Commit message:

Added transcript filtering module based on filter_vep script.

docs/output.md, after:

# cio-abcd/variantinterpretation: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline. Most of the plots are taken from the MultiQC report, which summarises results at the end of the pipeline.

The directories listed below will be created in the results directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

<!-- TODO nf-core: Write this documentation describing your workflow's output -->

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [ensemblvep](#ensemblvep) - Annotates VCF file and reports summary.
- [transcriptfilter](#transcriptfilter) - Filters for specific transcripts.
- [MultiQC](#multiqc) - Aggregate report describing results and QC from the whole pipeline.
- [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution.

### Ensembl VEP

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `ensemblvep/`
  - `*.summary.html`: Summary VEP report.
  - `*.vcf.gz`: Gzipped VCF file containing the input variants annotated with VEP. The CSQ string gives information about added columns by VEP.
  </details>

[VEP](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/index.html) annotated variants based on provided public databases. It provides biological information as protein consequence and effect prediction as well as co-located variants from existing databases giving information, e.g., about population allele frequencies. For full overview, see the [VEP annotation sources](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/script/vep_cache.html) and [VEP command flags](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/script/vep_options.html).

### Transcriptfilter

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `ensemblvep/`
  - `*.filt.vcf`: VCF file with all variants and additional FILTER column flag.
  </details>

[VEP_filter](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/script/vep_filter.html) is a separate script in the Ensembl VEP package that separates the filter step form vep. This module has a hard-coded configuration "--soft_filter" to prevent silent dropping of variants, instead a flag "filter_vep_fail/filter_vep_pass" will be added to the FILTER column. A default external argument is also --only_matched, will results in annotation being dropped if it does not match the filtering criteria. That results in variants only having transcript annotations matching the filter criteria, variants without any matching transcript will be retained, but without any annotation.

### MultiQC

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `multiqc/`
  - `multiqc_report.html`: a standalone HTML file that can be viewed in your web browser.
  - `multiqc_data/`: directory containing parsed statistics from the different tools used in the pipeline.
  - `multiqc_plots/`: directory containing static images from the report in various formats.

</details>

[MultiQC](http://multiqc.info) is a visualization tool that generates a single HTML report summarising all samples in your project. Most of the pipeline QC results are visualised in the report and further statistics are available in the report data directory.

Results generated by MultiQC collate pipeline QC from supported tools e.g. FastQC. The pipeline has special steps which also allow the software versions to be reported in the MultiQC output for future traceability. For more information about how to use MultiQC reports, see <http://multiqc.info>.

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reports generated by the pipeline: `pipeline_report.html`, `pipeline_report.txt` and `software_versions.yml`. The `pipeline_report*` files will only be present if the `--email` / `--email_on_fail` parameter's are used when running the pipeline.
  - Reformatted samplesheet files used as input to the pipeline: `samplesheet.valid.csv`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.
